- Everyone on YouTube, thank you for joining us
and watching the live stream or being part of the live stream.
If you're here now, Yuri, happy to have you
on the YouTube channel.
You about ready to kick off this podcast thing?
- Absolutely, let's do it.
- Right on.
- Right there.
(laughing)
- Yuri, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Yeah, yeah.
- It's great to have you here.
You know, we just met recently at Pi Bay down there.
So in honor of that, I wore my Pie Bay shirt today.
- Oh my God, I forgot about that episode.
- Yeah, where's your Pie Bay shirt?
Oh, come on.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- What a cool conference, huh?
- Yeah, it is, it is.
I love small conferences.
- I like small conferences and in the time of COVID
and all of this madness,
having a winter conference outside in California
at a beautiful food cart area where it's warm.
Oh, there were just so many things to like about that.
I gotta tell you, it was great.
- It was amazing.
It was the best day of the year for me, essentially.
Just being able to talk to people finally.
- I know, I know.
- And meeting new friends was amazing.
- And we both gave talks there.
I talked about Flask and HTMX,
and you spoke about building a database engine,
a whole database with Python, and that was interesting.
So then I watched a little more and I just thought,
Wow, there are a lot of interesting pieces of technology
in and around this thing you built called EdgeDB.
So I'm super excited to dive into that with you.
But before we do, let's just hear your story real quick.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
- So my co-founder, Elvis and I met many years ago,
probably 14 years ago or something like that,
working in a small Canadian company,
building big enterprise software for companies like Walmart.
And back then, we were actually--
the system that we were working on was written in PHP.
And we pushed PHP to the limits, but we always
knew that, hey, when we start our own thing,
we will be looking for something new and fresh for us
to tinker with.
And we looked around, and we just liked Python.
Liked it a lot.
Fantastic.
Was that Django?
I mean, that's right around the time of the Django growth,
or was it something else that brought you in?
- We started with Django.
We played with it a little,
but actually like we just started building our own thing
pretty much immediately without looking like
too deeply at existing frameworks or anything.
- Yeah, I get the sense that you and your co-founder
are framework builders.
- Yes, yes, we are.
Somebody asked me, maybe it was Guido,
I don't remember anymore,
what was your first thing that you wrote in Python?
and I said, "Function decorator."
(laughs)
I could just jump right in.
- Exactly, awesome.
Cool.
So how about now?
What are you doing these days?
Working on EdgeDB full-time?
- EdgeDB full-time exclusively, yeah.
We're building a great company here,
so it requires 100% of my attention.
- Yeah, I bet it does.
You can build a business on the side,
but it's a hard time.
And you have this great article that talks about
how you're gonna build your favorite new database
in a month, but that it actually takes 10 years
or something like that, right?
- Yeah, pretty much.
Yeah, it was a long, sometimes painful journey.
And we didn't realize like right off the bat
that we will be building a database, right?
We were building a Python framework
and the Python or essentially.
- A better way to talk to databases in Python
was your idea, right?
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
- Yeah, but I guess you didn't have in mind
that you would also build the database.
(laughing)
- No idea, yeah.
- Very cool.
Well, I think what you built is pretty interesting
and people are going to enjoy checking it out.
But more so, I think what is pretty interesting
is there's a lot of things in the Python space
that we enjoy and we appreciate,
especially what I would consider to be
the advantages of modern Python.
I don't know how you feel about it.
I know you've been deep in this world,
but to me it seems like just two or three years ago,
the people building frameworks,
think FastAPI or Pydantic or stuff like that,
have really embraced the true,
they'd taken full advantage of Python 3, right?
They said, oh, look, we have these typing,
we have typing, we have async and await,
We have all these things that we can bring together,
and it really feels like that stuff
is all starting to come together in a big way.
Is that, over the last couple of years, what do you think?
- Yeah, I also have this feeling
that the ecosystem becomes more and more robust,
that people build amazing systems with Python.
I think that asynchronous I/O played a part in it, for sure.
But I think that the other big thing
that is happening to Python right now
is strict typing, mypy and other similar tools.
This is what actually allows you
to manage your code base at scale.
And this is just incredibly important.
So yeah, those two things I would say.
- Absolutely, and you talk, we're gonna get into it
when we get into the architecture and stuff,
but you talk about using Cython
for making parts of your Python code faster.
And of course that relies heavily on typing
'cause you wanna say, here's an int64,
don't turn it to a pi long object pointer.
We just want an int64 that works on the stack really quickly,
right?
- Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
I mean, it's an open question.
Will Python ever enjoy strict typing
that the Python interpreter actually
takes care of to make things run faster or not?
But for Cython, it's absolutely critical.
And actually, I had this--
Sometimes I have this feeling that writing code in Cython is easier than in Python
because, hey, I have a compiler.
If something mismatches, I know it at the compile time, not the runtime.
Yeah, I suspect mypy is a little like that as well, right?
Exactly, exactly.
So when mypy started happening, because I was experimenting heavily with Cython before
mypy became popular, when mypy finally became like this common thing to use,
yeah, it was almost a revelation that we finally have this beautiful workflow with Python.
- Yeah. Well, I want to talk about some of the technologies
that are sort of surrounding this larger project
that you've been working on.
So over on GitHub, github.com/magicstack,
this is your company,
and one of the, you know, where sort of EdgeDB
and all that is coming out of.
But there's a lot of interesting things happening here
that I think people who see modern Python doing its thing
are going to appreciate.
We talked about the async stuff and so on.
So I wanted to dive into some of those first that
are orbiting your projects that you all have created here.
So let's start with MagicPython.
Tell us what this MagicPython is about.
>> So MagicPython is a syntax highlighter,
and it's actually used in VS Code by default.
So if you use VS Code and you edit Python in VS Code,
this is the stuff that VS Code uses under the hood.
It was used by GitHub for years to highlight all Python code.
And recently, I think GitHub switched to this TreeSitter, other Python highlighter.
But yeah, MagicPython was, and I guess is, incredibly popular.
It was born out of frustration, actually, because we were big fans of metaprogramming.
We abused Python a lot in interesting ways.
and one of the ways to abuse it was to push some meta information to function annotations.
It was before mypy and before typing, so yeah, we just were adding stuff to those annotations.
And we quickly discovered that built-in syntax highlighters in TextMate back then,
back then I was using TextMate heavily, they just couldn't highlight annotations.
So my goal was to basically, hey, can we create our own syntax
collateral for Python that would just take care of notations?
And by the way, highlight all of the newer stuff that is available in Python 3.
Because back then, Python 2 was still the king and Python 3 was kind of...
- Interesting. So a lot of the highlighters and editors and stuff
really would highlight kind of based on Python 2 type of syntax.
- Exactly. - Okay.
- Exactly. Exactly.
I know, it's 20... whatever this was, 2015 or something.
2015, yeah, it was clear to me that Python 3 is the future,
but yeah, the industry was still kind of moving slowly towards it.
But the key innovation of MagicPython, and I think this is why I think it's a high quality thing,
is unit tests.
So I'm a big fan of writing tests and having this test-driven development.
And the first thing after highlighting Hello World in TextMate,
the first thing for me was to figure out, can I actually build a unit test engine?
Because if you think of those syntax highlighters, essentially, it's a huge reg exp.
It's just mind-bogglingly huge, huge, huge reg exp.
- And writing reg exp is hard. - I was thinking about that.
Yeah.
- But modifying... - I was thinking about that.
Well, I was thinking down the road, you have a really interesting query syntax that's pretty
rich and powerful for EdgeDB.
Did your experience writing Magic Python give you the ability to go like, "Oh yeah, we can
write this thing that parses this insane complex language"?
How much did this play into your ability to go beyond SQL?
I wouldn't say much.
I mean, we have syntax highlighters for schema files and the HQL.
They're pretty basic right now.
We just highlight keywords and literals.
We have some interesting plans about that, and we can talk about it later, I guess, when
we'll be talking about HDB, like implementing language server protocol for HQL.
But the highlighter itself is pretty simple.
But I used this unit testing framework in those highlighters, and this is what gives
me peace of mind.
that the HQL highlighter is just working when I'm adding like a new operator or a new keyword.
I don't have to just test it manually on some like big file.
Yeah, absolutely. Sort of speaking to that thing that I talked about, a lot of interesting stuff
coming out of your work. Adrian out there says, "Didn't know you also made HTTP tools as well."
Indeed, yeah, there's a lot of cool stuff that you've done. So final thing on MagicPython,
Can I use it for other purposes than just VS Code Sublime and Atom?
Like, if I wanted to build my own thing that, you know, printed out, like, terminal stuff
or like some other kind of UI app, could I build, could I use this more generally than the editors?
I haven't tried it myself, but given that GitHub was using it to highlight the code,
I believe that there must be some libraries and packages that just can consume this
text made inspired syntax and just highlight, I don't know, stuff you printed to terminal.
>> I see. So it comes out as text made and then it just happens to these three editors
with their common heritage understand that. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I think text made started the revolution originally, then sublime text just inherited the
format and then VS Code just decided, hey, we should just use it. Yeah.
>> Cool. Yeah. Very cool. All right. Next, let's talk ASync.
So when you spoke about your journey towards creating this product in this business,
you talked about how central having asynchronous I/O and server work is going to be. And of course
that is true, right? Not all databases, but most databases are able to be a point of extreme
concurrency to the point that they can like handle the processing, right? So if you've got a web app,
you could scale your web app out and like if it's got two connections or 200 connections to the database,
generally that's fine. The database is meant to sort of scale that vertically, I guess.
So you really talked about, well, if you're going to do this in Python,
that probably means leveraging asyncio pretty strongly, right?
Yeah, yeah. It was pretty clear that we need asynchronous IO. As you said, databases have to
handle lots of connections. And also it's important to understand that most databases, like Postgres,
for example, the cost of establishing a new connection is pretty high.
So we wanted Edge... I mean, there are tools to mitigate that, like PgBouncer, for example.
It's like middleware you put in front of PostgreSQL to make connections cheaper.
And we just didn't want to have any of such tools as a requirement for EdgeDB.
We just wanted it to work natively out of the box without any configuration.
So yeah, we had to have cheap connections in terms of how fast you can connect.
And also, I mean, if your connection is just hanging out there,
we wanted to allow that, essentially.
So we had to have a way to handle thousands,
maybe hundreds of thousands, just concurrent connections
that maybe are not super active, but just, I mean, open.
And asynchronous core is the only way how you would be able to do this.
Like not even like even if Python didn't have GIL, for example,
we would still use asynchronous I/O to tackle this problem.
Yeah, I don't know exactly what the memory cost of a thread in Python is,
but there's an overhead for threads and the context switching between the OS
trying to figure out if that thread still needs to do stuff.
Yeah, you can't have hundreds of thousands of threads and be in a good place.
Yeah, but my concern wasn't even that.
maybe we would be smart and implement some sort of
m2n scheduling or something like that. I don't know.
It's just I don't believe that humans are good at writing threaded code.
Async/await gives you this luxury of essentially seeing where you can
actually give up control of the current code when it can await
things and potentially switch the context, right? So you can be smart
about locking access to shared resources and things like that.
With threads, it's way, way harder.
Maybe with Rust, it's easier because there is some compile time magic
that can help you.
But with pretty much every other language,
thread-based programming is very hard.
It is hard.
Well, I suspect many people, but not everyone out there listening,
knows that when you use the async I/O tasks and so on,
at least by default, they run on a single thread.
There's not actual threading happening.
Right?
When you use threads or multi-processing, you can get that true concurrency,
but this is different.
It's not really threads.
Yeah, it's different.
Basically, the idea for Async/Await is to use it for I/O bound code.
So if your code is doing lots of I/O,
pushing data from multiple connections here and there,
this is an ideal thing.
But if you're computing something like, I don't know,
doing something scientific computation or just use blocking I/O or disk I/O,
it's best to offset that computation into a separate process.
But yeah, if you just want to handle a lot of I/O in Python concurrently,
Async I/O is the way.
Yeah, the way that I like to think of Async I/O and Async and Await
is what you're scaling is you're scaling the waiting. If you're
waiting on anything, if I'm waiting on a database or waiting
in the database version for the client to talk to me or not to
talk to me, then you can basically take that period where
you'd be waiting and turn that into predictive computational
time.
I love it. I think we should put this like straight into the
ducks. I never thought about this way.
I'll see these, these benchmarks and stuff said, Oh, well, I did
this thing where I overwhelmed the database and then it didn't go very fast when I did
async I/O. It's like, well, because there's no period in which you're waiting. You're
like constraining the resource beyond what it can take. But if there was some sort of,
oh, I'm waiting for this thing to get back to me. Well, then all of a sudden there's
your performance. Okay. So when I saw this come out, I was super excited. I think this
was three, four, if my history reminds me correctly when this came out. Do you remember?
I think it was around 3.4 because the most important prerequisite for async.io to happen
was actually the yield from syntax.
Probably not a lot of people remember about it.
But back then async.io required this add-courting decorator and you would use yield from instead
of await in your code.
So that PEP, so basically Python 3.3 I think was a moratorium on modifying Python language.
So we had to wait for Python 3.4 to add yield from,
and then async happened.
- Right, that enabled it.
But when I remember when it came out,
I was like super excited about this.
And I saw like, oh, this is a harsh programming model.
This is really like direct in juggling
the those sorts of things.
And I had experience with C#,
which had async and await keywords as well.
I'm like, gosh, I wish this language had async and await.
And then I didn't know you then,
But I thank you because you offered authored PEP 492
co-routines with async and await.
Basically we have async and await in Python
because of you, right?
- Well, yes.
- I don't wanna give you too much credit,
you created the prep, the PEP that said,
like, let's stop using yield from and continue
and all these other things that you do with.
- I can tell you the entire backstory.
- Yeah, do tell us.
- It's relatively short.
Yeah, yeah, so basically we were trying to figure out
like the future API for HDB, Python client back then,
when HDB wasn't even a thing.
And we knew that we want to support the asyncio
in our future client.
But how do you actually have like a migration block?
Like you would have to say like,
try finally, accept, rollback, commit.
It's like a lot of code.
And we have context managers in Python, right?
So with the context manager,
you will just say with transaction
and just do all this magic behind the scenes.
but we didn't have an asynchronous version of with.
We had yield from, but how do you kind of mush together
yield from and with wasn't clear.
So I thought, hey, if we have like async keyword,
we could have async with.
And then it was natural case,
we just should replace yield from with await,
because I was also familiar with C#,
and I also liked the short and neat syntax of async await.
And then the next thought was that,
"Hey, what if you have a cursor to the database
and just want to iterate over the rows
and make it like prefetch those rows?"
And this is how Async 4 was born.
And then in about a couple of weeks,
Language Summit happened.
I think it was in Montreal.
That was PyCon US in Montreal.
And I met with Guido.
I showed him like rough sketch and he said,
"Yeah, let's do it."
I think I implemented the first prototype of this thing
in the interpreter over a couple of nights,
I just coded straight for 48 hours.
I wanted to impress Guido.
[LAUGHS]
And yeah, I just had this rough implementation.
And then just over the course of months and a half,
I was refining it and writing this PEP.
And this is how it happened.
I think it all happened because of Guido, because first of all,
he saw clearly this is an improvement to Yieldthrone,
like a big improvement.
- It's a huge improvement.
It makes it incredibly approachable.
It's like you do what you normally do,
but sometimes you might have to put the word await there.
- Exactly.
- But your mental model isn't about callbacks
and weird stuff like that.
It's just like you write the regular code,
but you sometimes need to await a thing.
And it's beautiful.
- Yeah, exactly, exactly.
And yeah, I'm grateful to Guido
because first of all, he recognized this thing
and encouraged me.
And second of all, he actually like inspired
lots and lots of refinements in this proposal.
And I was like working with him essentially all this time,
like a discussion happened in Python dev,
and sometimes he and I exchanged emails
and he proposed some ideas and I would just tweak the path.
So yeah, Guido was actually also behind this proposal
to a big extent.
- Yeah, there's some mind blowing stuff here,
like the async with, for example, as you point out, right?
These are wild ideas, right?
Instead of just calling, just saying,
There can be a function you have async for, async with,
there's really neat things in here.
- Actually, yeah.
I think that still async with is pretty unique.
Like JavaScript, for example, is lucky
because they have this nice syntax
for declaring anonymous functions, right?
And so you can just say,
await transaction and pass a function.
And it's like a multi-line function
and you can do whatever you need.
You don't actually have to have something like async with
in TypeScript.
JavaScript, but in many other languages,
you would need something like this.
And pretty much, I think we pioneered this idea in Python.
I think I saw a proposal to make using async in C#,
but I'm not actually engaged with C# community,
so I'm not, maybe it was implemented, maybe not.
- That would be the parallel, but I've also not tracking it.
Okay, this is really cool.
So awesome, awesome work on this, Pep,
when getting this in live.
Yeah, so let's talk two more AsyncIO things real quick
here before we get to Edge TV.
Or actually, three.
One jumped the list just yesterday.
Okay, so when you're doing AsyncIO,
there's this background event loop
that looks at all the things that could be done
and says, are any of them waiting?
Can we take that while it's waiting
and put it aside and go do something else, right?
That way I scale the waiting story.
And there's an implementation for that in CPython,
but you all decided, you and Elvis, your co-founder,
decided it would be nice if there was a faster,
more optimized version of that part
that does the checking and execution.
So you created this thing called UVloop,
an ultra-fast async I/O event loop.
It's incredibly easy to use, right?
Like to install it is-- - Two lines.
- It's two lines, right?
You import and then you run install
and you're good to go, which is fantastic.
tell people about uv loop and how broadly should this just be standard stuff we do in
all of our code that uses async and await?
>> That's an interesting question.
Let's jump in.
So uv loop wasn't the first thing that I created.
The first thing was actually HTTP tools.
Someone asked you about that a few minutes ago.
So I just wanted to experiment with Cython.
I discovered Cython.
I thought, hey, this might actually be a useful tool
and allow us to speed up Python a lot for some things
like parsing HTTP, for example.
>> Right.
The type of-- yeah.
>> Exactly, exactly.
So I look at Node.js, and they used a C HTTP parser.
I think that parser was actually extracted from Nginx.
And yeah, I just dropped it in HTTP tools.
It's literally 100 lines of code, maybe even less,
maybe 50.
just like a small dropper over the C library.
It worked and it worked great.
Then I thought, "Oh my God,
I now have this superpower."
>> What other things can I grab and wrap?
>> Exactly. Because you could do the same,
but just like using Python C API,
but you will end up writing like 3x,
maybe 5x amount of code.
Using Cython just feels like magic.
Yeah, it worked. Then I was like, "Interesting."
So there is this libuv library that actually powers Node.js and it's cross-platform and it's super fast and Node.js is fast.
Maybe, just maybe, I can do the same. I can just wrap it into Python and make a drop-in replacement for EventLoop.
So I prototyped something relatively quickly, maybe in a few days, basically, I just implemented a loop object and call soon.
Like, basically, the staple of anything. The most basic thing.
And it worked. It worked just fine. I was able to implement call later and then I was able to run a coroutine like
await sleep one print hello world and it worked and then I just over the course of next
several months, I think three, maybe four, maybe five months, I was just gradually implementing
async-io-api, swearing a lot because I discovered that this API surface is just huge.
It's an enormous API actually.
And yeah, then we posted benchmarks.
And I think it went somewhat viral.
It was on HN. I think it was like post number one.
Yeah, I think Brian and I covered it over on the Python Bytes podcast when it came out.
Because it was big news. Yeah.
Yeah, people are excited. Specifically, because basically,
we showed that you can write some Python code like a simple protocol parser
and it will be almost as fast as Go.
And sometimes it's faster than Node.js, which was surprising.
So, yeah, I think a lot of people are excited about it.
Yeah, that's fantastic. So the quick takeaway here is
UVLoop makes async.io two to four times faster.
You've got some benchmarks for different situations
and amount of data and so on, at least with regard to sockets.
So let's wrap this one up with...
Is that a universal statement that you would recommend there?
Yeah, uvloop.install?
It depends. I think for production it makes a lot of sense to use uvloop.
You should try it because I mean there are still some minor incompatibilities in uvloop
that are really hard to track.
Maybe there is some behavior difference or maybe there is a bug simply.
You're using something that a lot of people are not using with uvloop.
And it's still a possibility.
So yeah, use it. Use it with care in production.
In local development, I don't think you need it.
Like vanilla async.io should be plenty.
There is one more interesting thing about UVLoop.
It's a package.
It's a package on PyPI.
So if we find the bug, we fix it and we publish a package.
You don't have to wait until Python 3.11.7 to get your bugs
fixed.
So in a way--
Or improvements made, yeah.
Or improvements made, exactly.
So this kind of suggests that it's a great idea to use Evoloop.
But on the other hand, we really haven't had any emergency releases or anything in a long time.
We basically release almost every year just to catch up with the latest Python version.
I would say that Evoloop is pretty stable at this point.
Yeah, very cool.
Yeah, it definitely seems neat.
I think also it's probably a context of when does it make sense, right?
if you're running three tasks and that's your whole program,
who cares how fast Event Loop is?
All right, it's three tasks.
But if you have many, many fine-grained,
tons of little tasks and there's lots of core,
like how complex and how many tasks,
like basically how complex is the task coordination job
of asyncio, right?
The more complicated it is,
probably the better benefit you'll get from uv loop.
What do you think?
- I think, I mean, if we go deep in the details,
I would say it's not so much about juggling tasks around.
It is more about performing I/O in the most optimal way.
>> Okay.
>> Libv is just because it's so low level.
It just uses lots and lots of tricks under the hood to just do I/O faster.
The entire loop of calling callbacks in the loop,
it's a tight loop in C essentially.
>> Right.
>> It's much faster than a loop in Python.
That actually, yeah, those two points.
But yeah, the performance improvement is noticeable usually, very noticeable.
Cool.
Well, the benefit is if it's literally import uv loop, uv loop.install, run your benchmarks,
comment that line out, run your benchmarks again.
Exactly.
It's so easy.
You don't have to commit to it.
It's not like, oh, we're going to swap ORMs and try it again.
Exactly.
Yeah.
But I just love packages in Python that do this magic.
I think if you remember, there was this package called Psyco
created by Armin Rigo, creator of PyPy.
You just import Psyco, Psyco install, or something like that.
And boom, you have like an alternative CPython eval loop.
Your program just magically becomes five, 10 times faster.
It's just magic.
So yeah, it's great when we can do something like this.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
Adrian has an interesting question.
I know this came up around requests a couple of years ago.
could you give your thoughts on having things as part of the standard library,
basically having uvloop in this case be the replacement for async ioloop
rather than having an external package updated independently?
Yeah, it's an interesting question and I'm not super involved in conversations like this.
I know that Python core developers consider it actually separating some standard library
and shipping of them aside so that it can have like its own release schedule.
I think it's sort of mitigated with Lukasz Langa actually speeding up the release cycle for PyPI now.
It's being released like every year, which is amazing.
And I think the pressure is lower now to separate the standard library.
As far as including uv loop as part of standard library, I'm not sure it's a good idea.
First of all, it's entirely in Cython.
It's like 50,000 lines of Cython or something like that.
We will have to either adopt Cython as like an official standard library tool,
or rewrite it in C.
And if you rewrite it in C, it's going to be 100,000 lines in C.
It will be huge.
So probably not going to happen anytime soon.
Maybe with things like mypyC, we can make it happen eventually.
- That's interesting. - But mypyC is still pretty early.
Right. Okay.
Yeah, the conversation was had around that with regard to requests as well.
Maybe you're even part of it since you're a core developer.
But they decided not to make requests the new HTTP library of CPython
because it would hobble requests.
Like, it would mean requests could only be changed,
you know, once every 12 months or something like that, right?
Yeah, I think one of the concerns with requests specifically,
and I wasn't actively involved in those conversations at all,
but I think the concern that I heard was that HTTP is pretty wild
and you often need to fix some security issues and bugs
and you need to act quickly.
And if something as huge as requests and so fundamental as requests
was part of standard library, we would just have to be way more flexible
about making bug releases for CPython.
And Python is just, it's such a huge thing, right?
Like operating systems bundle with like multiple different
workflows are centered around it.
- It runs on helicopters in Mars.
I mean, come on, there's a lot of edge cases.
People are not picking it out of here, right?
- Exactly.
It's just upgrading a separate library is so much easier
than upgrading the entire Python thing.
So yeah, I think this is why packages like requests for sure will stay out of standard library.
Yeah.
All right, final question before we move on from uv loop,
because it's not even our main topic, but it is very interesting.
Teddy asks, "Are there any trade-offs of using uv loop
as opposed to the native built-in one?"
I think this is time for me to make a shout out
because we still haven't implemented a couple of APIs that are in AsyncIO,
like API balls protocol, maybe there is something else.
I just haven't got time to do it myself and we are busy with
with SGB, so if anyone wants to join the project and help, that would
be great. And that basically answers the question.
The fundamental APIs are already all there.
It's almost 100% compatible with uv loop,
with vanilla async I/O.
No trade-offs, except there are a couple of relatively new APIs,
I think, path 3.9 and path 3.10,
that are still missing from uv loop,
and we still should implement them.
Yeah, to be a true replacement, right?
Yeah, I think it's sent file and API goals and maybe something else.
Okay, uv loop is running inside EdgeDB?
Yeah, it powers the I/O server.
Basically, we use multi-processing architecture in HTTP.
We have a pool of compiler processes
because this is like computation CPU heavy thing to compile a query.
And then there is a core I/O process that just runs uv loop
and quickly, quickly, quickly goes through your connections
and pushing the data between clients, etc.
All right.
Another thing that came out just today, I know this is...
I don't want to spend too much time on it, but there's a big
new feature for tasks and AsyncIO in Python 3.11 coming very soon.
And you just gave a shout out on Twitter yesterday
saying that Task Groups is coming to AsyncIO.
This is a way, because right now if you start two tasks,
there's no way to say, "Well, if this one fails,
Don't even bother running that one. They're fully independent.
This is a way to create a dependency and control them as a set.
Tell us real quick about this.
Yeah, we have an API for spawning tasks concurrently.
It's called async_air_gatherer, but it's just a suboptimal API in many ways.
And this API is way superior.
We have to credit Nathaniel J. Smith for his work on Trio and Trio Nursery specifically.
And Trio is--
I mean, we can run an entirely different podcast episode
just about Trio.
>>Luis: I actually had nothing on.
Yeah, we talked about Trio on the show quite a while ago
when it was fairly new.
>>Kostya: It's an amazing thing.
And there are lots and lots of great ideas in Trio.
One of them is having this thing.
It's called Nursery in Trio.
And the Async and the Task Groups,
Async and Task Groups, essentially,
they just replicate this nursery idea.
they ported from Trio to AsyncIO.
Like the bigger points about how this API works
are all similar to Trio.
There are some details about how cancellation works, et cetera.
But most people probably won't really care about that one.
Yeah, OK, very cool.
It's great to see more innovation happening in AsyncIO.
Yeah, but task groups--
I'll just talk for a couple more minutes about task groups.
So task groups was a long requested thing.
A lot of people wanted task groups in Async.io.
And I was DMed like,
sometimes I was DMed like on a daily basis entirely.
We promised us task groups.
When can we have our task groups?
So the big like elephant in the room with task groups
is how do we handle exceptions?
Because multiple things can fail at the same time.
And they essentially will propagate
out of this Async with task group.
- You'll end up with a hierarchical tree
of exceptions representing the state of failure,
which is not how we typically think of exceptions.
- Exactly, exactly.
And we just had to figure it out.
And we had to figure it out in the core,
because if it was just some, I don't know,
some exception class defined in async.io,
then what would happen
when your async.io program crashed, right?
You wouldn't have like a correct traceback
in your terminal.
You wouldn't be able to understand what actually happened.
So we had to integrate this into tracebacks,
into like a debug.
We needed to make sure that it's like a standard thing that tools like Sentry, for example,
can take advantage of it and provide you like great visibility into what happens in your
IcQ application.
So we had to work in this exception group thing.
And there is this amazing new core developer, Yurit Katryl, and she spearheaded this effort
of just implementing this and drafting a proposal and just doing it to completion, essentially.
And it's because of her work, actually, task groups are finally a thing.
Because task groups themselves, it's like 100 lines of code with comments.
There is not much to them.
The huge thing is getting exception groups in.
And I believe Python is the first language that has this feature, like, right in the
its syntax, right, and its runtime model.
And this is also huge because I actually believe
that Python now can be like one of the best languages
to do concurrent programming in.
And I don't know, maybe when we have JIT
or something like that, it might actually match
goal in performance some way.
Would be ideal thing.
- So while I'm looking at this syntax here,
which I'll try to quickly, simply communicate
to people listening on audio,
It's an async with block.
So what you do is you say async with asyncio dot task group
and you create this task group
and then you can create tasks within there
that are all grouped together.
And then you also can do things like a wait stuff
while you're in there.
It looks to me like one of the things
that often I don't see possible in Python's async.
Previously, it's the ability to just fire off a task
and have it sort of just run in the background
to completion, right?
So you don't have to do like async or like run all
or gather or any of those types of things.
Basically the with block,
we won't exit the with block until all the tasks are finished
or till it fails, one of those two, right?
That's a cool feature of it alone to just kind of say,
like, I don't need to kind of store up all the tasks
and then make sure I'm waiting on them forever.
Like I can just kick them off
and then if they happen to start in this place,
then they're going to finish when this with block finishes.
I'm even more excited about this than I was before.
- Right, right, right.
It's a nice API to compose things in AsyncIO.
- Yes, exactly.
- I believe it's one of the bigger deals
for AsyncIO in the recent years.
So I'm super excited.
- 3.11 is out soon.
Not exactly sure of the release date.
I know it's in alpha stuff right now.
So it's getting real near.
- Yeah, yeah, it should be close.
- Yeah, for sure, awesome.
All right, last thing before we get to EdgeDB proper.
People, I would say that Postgres is the most popular
database for Python people doing database things,
possibly with the exception of SQLite,
but that really accounts for just like,
oh, I'm doing testing or oh, I use this
for this incredibly small, but like production level stuff,
it's gotta be Postgres, right?
- Yeah, yeah, it's fair to say.
- Yeah, maybe throw in some MySQL
and then like a little bit down,
maybe some MongoDB, something like that.
But like clearly it seems like Postgres
has a lot of interest for folks.
If you wanna talk to it through async and await,
which is exactly how you wanna scale your database stuff,
a pretty popular library is this one called async-pg, right?
- Yep, yep, yep.
- Yeah, you and Elvis created that, huh?
Yeah, so yeah, it was an interesting experience basically.
We knew that EdgeDB will be based on Postgres.
That was clear day one.
And we also knew that we have to have like this
very high performance bridge essentially
between Python and Postgres.
And it had to be asynchronous.
So there was no good asynchronous client
for Postgres back at the time.
And we couldn't just use PsykOPG, the most popular Postgres driver,
because it uses text encoding for data.
Maybe not anymore, but it used to have text, used to use text encoding.
And we actually had to use binary for some things.
So we just knew that, okay, we have to just jump in and explore Postgres protocol.
And we decided, okay, let's write the driver.
And yeah, this is how AsyncPG was born.
I think what makes async/pager different,
just besides that it implements binary protocol
and it's asynchronous, it's API,
because we were not basing it on the common Python DB API.
We basically designed an API to be as low level as possible,
as close to PostgreSQL semantics as possible.
So in DB API, there is this thing called cursor,
which has nothing to do with the actual database cursor.
So we didn't want to replicate that.
So yeah, we just built what we thought
were proper primitives for working with Postgres
as efficiently as possible.
We used binary protocol plus async.io.
And we, of course, used Cython to speed up
all the bottlenecks in it.
It's pretty much entirely in Cython, actually.
And yeah, the result is just amazing to this day.
AsyncPG is one of the fastest Postgres clients
on the planet across all languages.
- Yeah, that's fascinating.
You can see that it beats Node.js
and go pretty handily there.
- Yeah, we should probably update this chart, actually.
I'm pretty sure that they updated PGLibrary for Node.js,
so this is outdated.
I think it's closer in performance to AsyncPG,
but I think AsyncPG is still the fastest.
- Yeah, cool, awesome.
Well, very nice work there.
So taking all these together, uv loop,
async and await in the language, asyncpg,
all of these are building up your skills
to sort of almost build a database.
And so then you went on and actually did build a database,
right?
- Yeah, pretty much.
So we had this framework,
which was like almost an ORM in Python for many years.
And we built multiple different production applications
for that.
We shipped applications that were deployed to GE, Cisco,
companies like that.
And we knew it's something interesting,
but we also knew that it has to be bigger
than just a Python form, like it has to be a database.
And it's a surprisingly long road
to make something, to go this path essentially,
because you have to define a query language,
you have to define type system,
you have to define standard library,
you have to define protocols, how it works,
how migrations work,
all the different syntaxes for schema modeling.
It's a huge thing.
And yeah, with like all the right primitives
in Python itself, we knew that we can start
like morphing our code base
into like this separate service essentially.
And that was the necessary and required ground work
to make it to be happen.
Without it, we would probably not succeed.
- Cool.
So EdgeDB really written in Python?
- It is, most of it.
Yeah, mostly. The entire like IO service server is essentially a Cython thing.
So it's in C and this is why if you look at benchmarks of HDB,
it's actually pretty close to Postgres, to vanilla Postgres.
Like the overhead of HDB is super low.
And that is only possible because of Cython and like all low-level tips and tricks
that we learned when we were working on uv loop and async pg so we really optimized it a lot
the compiler part the thing that actually takes an hql query and compiles it to sql
that thing is pure python and it runs in a separate process but we do some also tricks to make it fast
like we cache things aggressively i mean in most applications you don't have thousands of queries
you only have like 10, 50, 100.
So they get cached pretty quickly,
and then you don't even run Python anymore.
>> You don't need to incredibly optimize
the understanding of the query because like you said,
it's not ad hoc stuff happening that happens at scale.
>> Exactly. I mean,
it's great when your compiler is exceptionally fast.
But for database, and especially if it's smart around extracting constants,
let's say you send select one, and then your next query is select two,
essentially it's the same query, it's absolutely the same query,
just different constants.
So if you extract it and you cache the compiled query
as if this wasn't a constant, but an argument to the query,
then yeah, you don't need to compile it for the second time.
So yeah.
And I don't know Postgres super, super well,
but I know some databases,
they at their level, when they see a query,
they're like, oh, I've seen this query before, they can cache the query plan
and those types of... so that's like another level of performance and speed up.
Yeah, we do that as well.
I mean, we did it even in asyncPg, for example, asyncPg automatically prepares statements for you
to enjoy this optimization so that Postgres doesn't have to reparse
your SQL query, it can just execute the pre-cached plan.
We do the same in HDB and many other things.
This is why HDB is based on Postgres,
but it fully envelopes Postgres because we want to be
in full control of the underlying Postgres instance.
>> Right. In some sense,
this is a brand new database that's got
some really cool features that I'm going to ask you about very soon.
But in the other sense,
it's got a lot of stability because it's a database level API
the rethinking of a well-known core
that people already trust.
- Exactly, this is an interesting thing, actually.
A lot of people are not 100% satisfied
with relational databases for a variety of reasons.
Somebody's not satisfied with scaling,
some not satisfied with SQL,
and some not satisfied with migrations
and how rigid the schema is and how inconvenient it is to deal with a relational database.
So it's a huge problem.
You have a part of it which is just language design and standard library and type system,
how that part works.
The second is workflows around your database.
The third is the engine of your database, like how it actually works.
And EdgeDB wants to challenge everything, but we're also not dumb enough to challenge
everything at the same time.
We understand that just writing this whole thing from scratch is impossible.
No company in the world will be able to pull it off.
Well, maybe some companies will be able to, but definitely not a startup.
But they have many, many employees.
Exactly.
And probably a giant company.
And multi-billion dollar companies.
Exactly.
But so for us, the only viable strategy was to pick a database that is already trusted,
that is already fast and universally loved, which is Postgres,
and it's also incredibly capable, and just build on top of it.
And it's not actually a new approach in databases,
like lots of databases actually are built on like primitive key value databases,
like LevelDB or something like that.
It's a popular approach.
We're just taking it further.
We are saying that, hey, using a key-value storage won't buy us much.
We are like high-level programming language requires a lot of code to be written,
to properly be executed in good time.
But SQL looks like this nice compile target.
So this is why we use Postgres.
>> Yeah, very cool.
out of the TypeScript to JavaScript equivalent of the database query language in a sense.
Yeah, pretty much. I mean, sometimes I explain HDB as LLVM.
Like, imagine LLVM, it compiles your high-level code to low-level code,
and then it's jitted, etc.
And the same about HDB, we compile your high-level schema
to a proper normalized table layout.
We compile our HQL, high-level query language, down to SQL,
and that SQL can actually be jitted by Postgres.
So essentially, ultimately, your SQL might be executing
with like native, at native code speed.
Not now, but in the future.
- Sure.
So what's the elevator pitch for people who are out there,
they're slightly, you know, not super thrilled
about the database they're necessarily using,
whatever that is, and they're kind of exploring.
I picked up a few things that I think make it unique,
but I want to ask you.
It's your baby.
>>All right, so I guess I'll give two pitches.
One is super high level, and one is slightly more low level.
A super high level pitch is that imagine you have a tool.
And when it's a great tool, it becomes an extension
of your hand, essentially.
You don't notice it.
You just do things, right?
Current databases are not like that.
They require lots and lots of mental overhead to work with them.
Like what ORM library do you use in this language?
>> Right. Is there lazy loading and N plus one stuff I got to consider or is it not?
All those kinds of things.
>> Exactly. Then you have to learn their API,
and then you have to learn SQL and
understand how those things interact with each other,
and then you have to care about deployment and migrations.
It's just so much headache.
This alone explains why MongoDB was so popular and is so popular,
because a lot of people just decided,
"Okay, to help with that, I don't want to deal with this."
>> I believe in the relational space altogether.
>> Yeah, exactly. Just abandoning this train.
We want to fix all of that in NGDB.
When I give you a tool that you just don't notice,
when I give you a data model that just feels
native to Python or TypeScript or Go or any other language,
you don't have to think in tables anymore.
I'm going to give you a query language that is super easy to use and learn and compose
and build query builders around.
And essentially, we want to essentially kill the entire concept of form.
We don't need it anymore.
We are almost sorry that forms have to exist in a way.
I was going to ask you about that.
They're solving an incredibly difficult problem.
This problem is called object impedance mismatch there.
Yeah.
to like objects, it's a super hard problem.
I feel sorry that they have to go through this,
but we just looked at this problem and decided,
hey, can we actually just solve
this object impedance problem in a different way?
Can we just avoid solving it entirely?
Can we just give you a database
with the proper high-level data model
that doesn't have this problem at all?
Then suddenly you don't need ORMs.
- Let's talk real quick about the actual way you define
what would be the equivalent, I guess,
of like a DDL table, create script,
or somewhat related to that, maybe closer,
is like an ORM class.
Like it's kind of the--
- Okay, can I start a little from afar?
- Yeah, yeah, let's start back.
- Okay, now it's gonna be the second pitch,
which is slightly more detailed.
So we say that HDB is a new kind of database.
It's not just relational.
We call it a graph relational database.
So essentially, we are saying that we created an extension
to the relational model.
So what actually constitutes the graph relational model?
It's first of all, in all of your rows,
all of your tuples in your relational algebra,
they essentially have a globally unique key.
Now, this is a requirement.
It's data independent, it's just UUID essentially.
Every row in your database will have it.
This is the first requirement, first modification.
The second extension is links.
The idea that links between data
is like a first-class citizen of the model.
You don't need join, you don't need foreign key.
You just know that, hey, if this type links to another type,
it's just gonna be like a relationship
between the unique IDs.
This is what unique IDs gives you.
And a second thing is, a third thing,
is that everything is a set.
This, like, if you have an object that is connected to multiple other objects,
this is a set of objects.
If you have an object that has a bunch of properties,
it's gonna be a set of properties.
Even a single thing is a set as well.
And this is what later enables HQL to be super composable.
But these are just like three simple kind of axioms
that are in the core of the model.
So if we talk about like this schema snippet,
where we have an object type block post,
with required property content, which is text,
and required link author, which is another type called user,
it's gonna be compiled to a table in SQL
with a column called content, with a column ID,
which is gonna be a unique UUID
for every blog post, it will have it automatically.
It's immutable, it's read-only.
You don't have to create them manually.
And a user will also be a table,
will also have IDs, and then we'll have a separate column,
which is gonna be called author,
in which we will have IDs of users.
So ultimately, ultimately, like deep beneath
what you see in EdgeDB is like this high-level schema.
It's all compiled properly to the relational model.
It's all normalized there.
we're still relational, we still like exhibit
like the same characteristics,
it's just we're hiding a lot of this like low level things
that you had to bother with,
with this high level one,
we're just abstracting away the low level stuff.
- Is there a way to directly connect
to that relational view?
- You mean Postgres?
- Yeah. - Postgres database?
- Yeah, like the underlying--
- I'm not sure that's really a good idea,
But in SQLAlchemy, there's a way to go,
"I just need to get out of here and send raw SQL for a moment."
That feels like that's the same.
I just need to go to the guts for a minute.
Yeah. So with EdgeDB, the goal is for you to never actually need that.
There is just one exception to this.
Just one exception.
But basically, our goal with EdgeQL,
we knew that, first of all, we have to elevate the data
and make it more high-level.
And second of all, we knew that, hey, in order for a relational database to be successful,
it just has to have query language, right?
Because our data model is different, we have to come up with our own.
This is how HQL was born.
We spent years designing HQL.
And the reason why is because we wanted it to be actually more powerful than SQL in many
ways.
have something that is expressible in SQL,
but isn't expressible in HTML, we treat it as a bug immediately.
If something is easier to do in SQL than in HTML, it's a bug.
And this is why we spent so many years kind of refining this thing,
to make HTML a capable thing.
So basically, you never need to use SQL.
You don't need to know about SQL or know about its existence.
And this is a powerful thing, because when you use a norm library,
you have to know about SQL.
With HDB, no, we just learn one language,
and you're good to go for the rest of your life, essentially.
There's just one use case when you might need SQL.
It's when, let's say, you're a big company
and you're using some BI tools like Tableau or something like that.
You have analysts that already know SQL.
And we're going to do something about it.
We're going to open like...
- Like an adapter.
- Adapter, exactly.
It will allow you to just run SQL against the database in read-only mode.
- That makes a lot of sense.
Because there are these big BI tools.
And you're like, if your data is here,
do you really want to have some job
to move it to another Postgres just to run an analysis on it?
Yeah.
Exactly.
I mean, just like with us not attacking this problem all
at once and implementing the engine and the language
and everything else, here we also
understand that we are not going to replace all the business
intelligence infrastructure overnight.
And we have to make it be compatible.
It's not there yet.
it will be a part of a future release.
- You have a nice roadmap, which we'll cover in a minute,
but like, I really love how you sort of--
- Oh my God, it's so outdated.
(laughs)
I can just say it out loud, like the idea--
- But let me, like just for people who wanna see,
if they go there just visually,
the way that you've laid this out of like where you are
and where you're going,
like so many libraries and products should model this
'cause so often, you know, you'll reach out to the companies
"Hey, it'd be great if you could do this.
Oh yeah, it's on our roadmap."
Like, "Oh yeah, well, what is that like some,
where do you even have that?"
So anyway, I think your roadmap is great,
but give us the update.
- It is beautiful and I encourage everybody
to go and check it out.
It's hdb.com/roadmap.
It is slightly outdated.
Lots of things that are in progress.
- Yeah, this Formula car here, this is a 2021 series.
They just redid the Formula One cars for 2022.
So that's probably not what you're talking about.
All right, so tell us what's coming for us.
What's coming?
It took us years for building HTTP 1.0.
And during this time, we were almost encouraging people
not to use HTTP because it's a relational database.
If you build a business on an alpha version
of relational database and it goes down,
your business will go down with it most likely.
So we didn't want that.
And people should know you just released 1.0, right?
That's a huge, huge thing.
Well, congratulations.
We launched 1.0 a week ago.
It was on Hacker News number one for 13, maybe 14 hours.
It was a pretty interesting event.
We also had a live stream, us launching it,
talking about the architecture of HDB, of the query language,
comparing it to SQL.
It's a great event.
And I encourage you to check it out if you have time.
And if you're interested, it's YouTube/hdb.
Check it out.
You'll find it there.
But yeah, so it took us years to do 1.0 just right,
to make sure that EdgeQL is right, that its design is sound,
and that the schema is right, and the workflows, and CLI,
and the client APIs, everything is just right,
and that we are confident that, hey, we're not going to be changing it.
We're not going to be retroactively fixing things.
So it took us a long year, many years, but now it's out.
And now we don't want to spend many years on HDB 2.0.
We actually want to make it way quicker.
We have the solid foundation.
We can iterate much faster now.
And this is what we're going to do.
So our current target, internal target,
is to release 2.0 sometime in May 2022, so relatively soon.
And 2.0 will have a few features.
One is almost implemented.
It's a groupby statement.
As I said, the idea of HQL is to actually surpass SQL in capabilities.
And right now with HQL, it's already incredibly powerful.
You can fetch that data hierarchies, you can compute things,
you can use aggregate functions, you have subqueries, you have JSON.
It's an incredibly powerful language right now,
but a proper group by statements will give it proper analytical flavor.
Now you will be able to actually create reports.
and we have a great Groupby design.
By the way, we try to make the HQL design process as open as possible.
We have RFCs. It's github.com/hdb/rfcs.
So if you're interested to look at how our Groupby is different from SQL Groupby
and why it's better than SQL Groupby,
you can just go ahead and read an RFC about our Groupby.
So Groupby is going to be one thing.
The second thing is going to be a proper explain for your queries,
queries, like why is my query slow and we have some ideas on how to make it
less cryptic than the default explain output that you get in most databases.
And then there is an exciting thing and I hope that we'll have enough time to
implement it, which is access control. So, EdgeDB is this like vertically
integrated thing. So, you define your schema and in your schema you can define
aliases, which is basically a view in your relational database.
You can define fields or object types that are computed dynamically with HQL.
So schema depends on HQL and HQL depends on schema in HDB.
And they are intertwined.
So we have this idea.
It's not that it's super new, but in HDB it's going to be super powerful.
It's that you'll be able to specify different policies on your schema type.
like allow reading something or allow mutating something or disallow etc.
And we don't want to hard code that.
So essentially we are introducing this concept of context in a database.
You'll be able to define sort of like global variables, like context variables in your schema,
say a user ID in 64 and something else is true.
And then when you just get your connection in your Python code,
you say with context pass user ID,
that is automatically passed to the database.
In your schema, you can implement arbitrarily access logic on your schema type.
And this logic will be automatically enforced in all your queries.
Oh, fantastic. Yeah, that's really cool.
The homepage is filtered, you're fetching data for report,
and it only includes the data that your business logic allow
it to be there.
So basically, with HDB, you will have schema.
And that schema not only will define
just the data layout of your application,
but also the access patterns and many other things in the future.
Yeah, I really want to ask you about the query syntax,
because I find it super interesting,
especially also how it relates to like,
ORMs and so on.
But Michael out in the audience has a pretty neat question
that sort of follows onto the roadmap first.
So since EdgeDB is fundamentally Python,
it'd be great to have a way to run user-defined functions
in Python against, so like, stored procedures,
but Python, not SQL.
- Yeah, yeah, it's an interesting question.
I mean, user-defined functions,
well, first of all, there are like,
couple of different planes, I would say,
of user-defined functions in the context of HDB,
because HDB has this notion of extensions.
The API isn't public yet, but HDB, for example,
supports GraphQL natively.
You can just run HDB, let's say, on port 555.
It's in the localhost, colon 555 slash db, mydb slash GraphQL.
And we want you to be able to also define potentially
and eventually, like user-defined API handlers there.
So that with HDB, you would not need a back-end at all
if your business logic is relatively simple.
Oh, interesting. So if I've got like something on Netlify
where it's pure static code,
I just write a little JavaScript, some view or whatever,
and it could theoretically do read-only stuff maybe
to an HDB instance.
Or write-only, yeah, absolutely.
So yeah, we just want to kind of push this idea of back-endless development as far as we can.
And because HDB has this incredibly powerful schema and will soon have access control,
that already allows you to eliminate a lot of code, right?
If only you could define some simple server-side, database-side function.
A little bit of Python in there.
A little bit of Python or JavaScript or maybe a raster or something
that you can just make that request to Stripe API, do something and then glue things together.
then maybe you don't need the backend at all.
So this is our vision, eventually, to allow things like this.
And second plane is user-defined functions within the database.
And because we're using Postgres, those functions are going to be running inside Postgres.
You will be able to call them from the query language, like,
"Hey, just use NumPy to crunch this data for me, like write in HKEO."
This is also possible.
There are extensions for Postgres that allow you to do that.
It's possible to define user-defined functions
and post-receive in multiple different languages.
Extensions for that are there.
So yeah, it's an interesting thing for us to think about,
and we are thinking about it, but probably not for 2.0.
- Yeah, okay.
Very cool.
Let's talk about this statement here for a minute.
There's a lot.
I think this, I'll describe it in a second
for people listening.
I think this query syntax highlights a lot
of probably what makes HDB unique
and some of your motives here.
So if you wanted to go and get say a movie,
which has a relationship to an actor's table
and you wanna do some sort of filter type thing,
you would say select movie curly brace,
look at that, title, that's the select projection.
So movie.title basically,
and then actors curly brace, name and email.
So is that, is this part right here,
this sub actors, is that traversing the relationship,
that graph relationship?
- Exactly, basically traversing the graph.
- And then inside this like statement,
you say order by dot name,
you have this cool convention of dot,
which if you're in one of these scopes,
like curly bracket actors, then you can say dot,
and it means dot name applies back to that, right?
- Yes, and basically this is just syntax sugar.
Nothing prevents you from spelling it out completely.
like you say, you can say order by movie.actors.name.
- Yeah.
- Because you're already inside the actors essentially,
we're just like giving you this.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Then another thing that stands out for the query syntax
is you can define inline variables
using the walrus operator, by the way.
- Yeah. (laughs)
- So you can say average review equals math mean
dot reviews of the movie, then dot rating.
And is this also traversing?
- Exactly. - What is this?
Yeah, so basically a movie type has a multi-link reviews.
So multiple reviews can be attached to movies.
And every review has, let's say, a five-star rating,
an integer of 1 to 5.
And this is how you quickly can say, hey,
just calculate the mean number of--
the mean value of all linked reviews and all their ratings.
This-- somebody on Hacker News years ago
aptly called HTL as a child of SQL and GraphQL.
And I mean, it's funny, but there is truth to it.
Because GraphQL made it extremely obvious to people
that working with object hierarchies this way,
when you can just have a query
that just selects something deep, right?
Is extremely important.
People suddenly realize this is cool.
Some companies even try to make GraphQL work
for relational databases such as Hasura,
and they have an amazing product.
And the only problem is that GraphQL isn't actually,
it wasn't designed for creating databases.
It's an API, which is a REST replacement.
So while it works for some things,
good luck computing something in GraphQL.
You just can't, you can fetch things,
but you cannot compute like your average review
is not possible to do in GraphQL.
SQL, on the other hand, is very stubborn
when you have to select anything nested.
Like, it thinks in tables, you have to think in tables.
You either like select super wide tables
and then you have to write some Python code
to kind of combine it back to your shape or use a norm.
Or if you're using advanced database,
you can use things like ArrayAg.
But SQL, it doesn't shine problems like this.
So yeah, with EdgeQL, we're kind of marrying those both worlds.
You have this deep fetch syntax, and you
have an ability to drop computation
at any point of your query.
There are a couple of other super important things
about EdgeQL, if you want, I can--
Yeah, we're getting short on time, but yeah, go ahead.
Sure.
So as I said before, sometimes the PhHDB is like this.
OEM thing like compiler.
So when we compile HQL query to a SQL,
we have one important thing.
Every HQL query, no matter how complex it is,
it's always compiled to just one SQL query.
And this is very important in the context of relational databases
because when you have just one single query, it's atomic.
So you don't need like an explicit transaction.
You're already like working, you always work with the same snapshot update essentially.
- Interesting. So you're not in this case, like going, doing a query for the movies
and then doing a query for the actors and then doing a query for the reviews as three steps.
You're just, it's basically a three-way join and then you're getting the data back out,
something like that. - It's slightly more complicated than three-way join.
- Yeah, I'm sure it is. - But yeah, basically, basically, yeah,
that's the idea. For one HQL query, it's always one SQL query. It's very important. We use lots
of interesting tricks to make it happen. And if you're interested about those tricks,
youtube.com/hdbs and watch our live event to explain this all actually.
But it's an important thing and then HQL is actually
it's very composable so you can pack multiple different queries into one
query so you can have a query that reads data,
insert data, mutates data and introspects the
schema all in one huge thing and it will execute quickly for you and
return your data like in proper way ready for you to be consumed
consumed. So, Edge Kill is extremely powerful in that regard. And this is what separates it from
ORMs, because your ORM, be it SQLAlchemy or Prisma or something like that, they might have a high
level API for some operations. But they also don't really restrict themselves on how many queries it
will take to implement that API. Sometimes, plus one, yeah. Right. And if you benchmark it on local
host, for example, databases on your laptop and your code executes on laptop, it appears to be
fast. So you have three queries instead of one. So what? There is zero latency between
your database and your code.
And probably not full production levels of data.
Yeah, sure. But when you move it to the dot data center, you will have latency between
your code and the database. And even if you have like one millisecond latency between
your queries, suddenly you just start losing performance a lot because your Python that
uses or JavaScript that uses a more operation,
you can actually fire 10 queries.
This is easy, 10 queries is fine.
Imagine just 10 milliseconds and just doing that,
just latency, nothing else.
You're just losing performance.
With SDB, it's not a thing.
>> Final question here. When I run this,
what do I get back in Python?
Obviously, there's a nice async
and synchronous Python API to talk to this.
>> Yeah. But when I run this query in Python, what do I get?
>> It depends on how you run it.
We offer you two modes,
essentially, two output modes.
Any HQL query can be compiled as JSON.
In our Python client,
you just say query JSON and it will return you JSON data,
like ready to be pumped to your front end.
Or you can just say query.
When you say query, it will return you rich Python objects.
It will have movie Python object,
which with the title,
a string attribute with an actors list,
which will have actors objects within it, etc.
It's also very compact on the IO level.
We're not sending super fat tables or anything.
The data is neatly serialized.
No need for any duplication, anything.
It's just like you have your native object data model in the database,
you query it, and you get objects out of it.
So you never have to think about any tables or anything.
It's always high level.
- Nice. All right.
Final question, then we really do have to wrap it up.
One of the things that's really nice about ORMs
is I can say my thing dot,
and I get a list in my editor
of what I should be getting back from the database.
Can I do that with this?
I know the movie is basically defined
in the GraphQL schema definition.
Is there a way to do like a typeshed type thing?
Yeah, EdgeDB, sorry.
Yeah, sorry.
In the EdgeDB schema language,
but is there a way to do like a typeshed thing to say,
well, that thing you get back looks like this?
- Yes, unfortunately not in Python yet.
In TypeScript, we just released our query builder
and it's insane because the API of the query builder
super closely replicates the layout of the HQL query.
It's basically like one-to-one correspondence.
It's like almost like same thing.
And in TypeScript, we just focused on TypeScript first,
then Python is next.
But for TypeScript, yes, you reflect your schema
with just one command line command.
And in VS Code, you now have full autocomplete.
You can express your queries in TypeScript,
no matter how nested they are,
no matter what kind of computation you do,
it's still the same idea.
Whatever query you build in your TypeScript
is gonna be just single edge kill query,
single SQL queries, it will be fast.
And you have full auto-completion and more,
you actually have full return type inference.
You don't have to type anything.
You have a query and your VS Code and TypeScript,
they will know the type of the data that's going to be returned.
>> Interesting. Okay.
>> It works like magic.
We're going to see if we can replicate
this experience with Python and mypy.
This is going to be our goal to make something like this happen.
Right now, we just have this low level,
well, relatively low level client API for Python.
You can run any HQL query, you can get data for it,
you can do it in async or sync, entirely up to you.
But the typing integration specifically isn't there.
And second part of this question is that we are looking in future
at implementing a language server protocol for EdgeDB.
So install EdgeDB locally and then VS Code will just connect to it.
And then you would have your autocomplete for HQL queries,
for schema files.
This is going to be great.
But I'm just not sure what kind of ETA we can put in it.
Probably not 2.0.
>> Yeah, looking forward to it.
Very neat work on EdgeDB and obviously all the building
blocks that we talked about at the beginning.
Congratulations.
>> Thank you, Michael.
>> Yeah, you bet.
All right, very quickly, lightning round, like quick.
Favorite editor?
>> VS Code.
>> Okay.
>> Although I enjoy Vim as well.
>> Right on.
And then notable PyPI package?
>> I'll list mine, you look.
Right, I'll list my Py as well.
My Py is a great thing.
Use my Py.
>> Cool.
Right on.
All right.
Final call to action.
People are interested in your projects, probably primarily EdgeDB.
What do you say?
How to get started?
>> Yeah, absolutely.
It's ready for you.
It's 1.0.
It's stable.
Follow us on Twitter.
It's Twitter Edge Database without any underscores
or dashes, just Edge Database.
Follow us on Twitter.
You will find the Discord link right in the Twitter
description.
So join our Discord.
We try to grow a community.
And yeah, build something amazing.
EdgeDB-- I can say it with full confidence.
HDB is the most amazing thing that ever happened to relational databases.
So take a look at it.
This is the beginning of hopefully a big movement.
Yeah, fantastic.
All right, let me put in one final Postscript question.
Sorry.
I really wanted to ask you this, and I think it matters for people considering adopting it.
But do keep it super quick.
What's the business model?
Like when you guys release this thing, is it...
How do people get it?
Will there be a free version?
What's the story?
- So, HDB is fully open source.
It's Apache to license.
It's externally permissive, no strings attached.
We'll make money by running HDB for you, essentially.
We will have a hosted version of HDB.
- HDB is a service, yeah.
- Absolutely.
And this is how most database companies
make money these days.
It's not anymore about enterprise version
of your database so much.
It is about, hey, can you run this database
for us in a private cloud?
- Back it up, scale it, give us all that.
- Exactly.
- Magic.
- We're also actively working on that.
Although you can run as you'd be right now
on top of Aurora Postgres, RDS Postgres and Google Cloud.
We have guides for that.
So if you need to deploy your HDB application,
we have your back,
but we'll have this like native proper cloud version of HDB
with which you will be able to just put like
with one terminal command,
you will be able to bootstrap a cloud database for yourself.
It's gonna be amazing.
- All right, fantastic.
Thanks, Yuri.
- Thank you.
- Yeah, bye.